---
title: "Episode 3: Base Quantities & SI Units"
---

- [[Advanced Physics Podcast Series]]<span id='PPGbOAyQw'/>
- __H - So, we wrapped up the last one talking about units, and in particular the concept of SI units.__<span id='Zffrpz_ls'/>
- **T - So, what else do we need to know, understand and be able to do?**<span id='bldXqG6E_'/>
- H - We need to be completely familiar with all the SI units, and all the conventions for writing every prefix. See the nice summary that we’ve added to the resources area - http://www.saps.org.uk/attachments/article/66/SAPS).<span id='KHBccKvSv'/>
- T - In order to express certain quantities we combine the SI base units to form new ones. For example, if we wanted to express a quantity of [[**Velocity**]] which is **Displacement**/time we write metres per second. For some quantities, we combine the same unit twice or more,<span id='R__-N3oO9'/>
- For example, to measure area which is length x width we write metres squared.<span id='AClcLzskQ'/>
- H - Certain combinations of SI units can be rather long and hard to read, and so some of these combinations have been given a new unit and symbol in order to simplify the reading of data.<span id='xMeihFY1s'/>
- T - A **force** is expressed in base units as kilogram metres per second squared, which is a bit of a mouthful. So, we define a new SI unit, the newton as it’s easier.<span id='PTLdfr3Rb'/>
- H - Yep, and another one - power, which is the rate of using energy, is written as kilogram metres squared per second cubed. This is even more of a mouthful and since it is a combination that is used regularly, a new unit has been derived from it called the watt (symbol: W). That just makes it easier, but you need to know how all of these units work together. We’ve put some good stuff in the resources section to help with that as well.<span id='SdmZ1VXZa'/>
- T- In particular you need to be familiar with Avogadro's constant. It’s weird because it isn’t a unit in the same way a metre or a kilogram is. You can go to a vault in France and see a block of metal which is the kilogram, it’s something we made up so everyone can know how much mass something has.<span id='nqqJ6UMRg'/>
- H- Right but we didn’t define Avogadro’s constant in the same way. Avogadro’s constant is actually just a really, REALLY big number. It’s the number of carbon atoms in 12 grams of the carbon 12 isotope. Remember that. It’s just a number of atoms. This large number is also called a mole. You can have a mole of atoms or molecules or anything else, you could have a mole of cars or planets too - it doesn’t matter what the objects are.<span id='vnFoYEcn_'/>
- T- If you know how many moles you have of something, multiplying that number by Avogadro’s constant will tell you exactly how many things you have. Avogadro’s constant converts moles into numbers.<span id='ITW_PEOqg'/>
- H- Try to remember this constant is 6 times 10 to the 23 atoms per mole, though it will be given to you. It’s a preposterously large number and it goes to show how tiny atoms are. For example if you had a mole of penny coins (1p coins) and you shared them evenly between all the humans on the planet, every single person on the planet would have around one trillion pounds. At the exchange rates in 2016, that’s approximately the GDP of South Korea, the eleventh highest GDP in the world.<span id='ZFArBl7l7'/>
- T- Right, so it’s a big number. I get it!<span id='8bK45bWiz'/>
- **T- So, what else do we need to be able to do?**<span id='L85MYgT5y'/>
- H- We need to be able to make reasonable estimates of everyday physical quantities, such as the speed of a car, the mass of a train, the number of atoms in a human etc.<span id='OlCtIUTFS'/>
- T - Really? Well how would we do that then?<span id='ArFsws9DJ'/>
- H - It’s something that seems really daunting at first but we’re all a lot more aware of things like this than you might first think. You have to also remember that we’re not looking for exact answers here, just for the order of magnitude of the answer, which is the nearest power of 10. Ask yourself, what is the nearest power of 10?<span id='EPlSsZm0x'/>
- T - Let’s work through an example then, how might we set about calculating the number of atoms in a human?<span id='xcgOLcbNs'/>
- H- Let’s start with what we know. How much mass does a person have? The closest power of 10 (at least for most people) is about 100 kg. 100 kg is a pretty reasonable estimate at least in terms of the sort of rough guess answer that we’re looking for. If we know how much mass something has, we can figure out the number of atoms that are in the substance AKA the number of moles in the substance as long as we know the mass of each individual particle AKA the molecular mass. The molecular mass for most atoms is of the order of 10.<span id='VzL7yd8NE'/>
- T- We’re Carbon based lifeforms after all, Carbon has a molecular mass of about 12. We’re also about 70 percent water and if you cracked out the **Maths** you’d figure out that in a water molecule the average atomic mass is 6. Don’t get too upset by thinking about all the heavier elements in our bodies, again this is a rough calculation.<span id='fzAEloAma'/>
- H- So let’s take our mass, 100 000 grams, divide by the “mass of each atom” (the mr) which is about 10 to get an answer of 10 000 moles of atoms. Each mole represents 6 times 10 to the 23 atoms so the total number of atoms is 10 000 times 1 mole which is 6 times 10 to the 27 atoms. 6 is actually close enough to 10 that we can say the number of atoms in a typical human body is of the order 1 times 10 to the 28 atoms.<span id='BG_QviGyn'/>
- T- So it seems that there are about 10 to the 28 atoms in a human body. This answer obviously isn’t 100% accurate. You could carry out a more accurate calculation to get an even closer estimate but again it’s important to think about the meaningfulness of your result.<span id='wgbD-EuD8'/>
- H - What was the point of this spot of **Maths**? Well, we were just trying to get a feel for how many atoms make up our bodies right?<span id='8_0QKrA--'/>
- T - That’s right. There’s not really much point in wasting our time doing this more accurately for our purposes. You can and should use this so called “back of the envelope” calculation method as often as you can. It’s a great way to see about what size a number you should be expecting from your calculator before you use it in an exam. It will help you realise if you’ve perhaps entered a number in the wrong place or forgotten to square something.<span id='z9OuhxUjj'/>
- H- If you’re now thinking “I thought [[Physics]] was a super high tech exact science, this seems hand wavey and really unprofessional” then you should know that it’s really not that simple. Physicists always think about what they need to get out of a calculation. Yes, there are times when you need to measure the electric charge distribution of an electron to such **precision** that if it were to be the size of the solar system we’d know it was spherical to within the width of a single human hair but there are also times when you need to know that a car is about 1000 kg. You need to always be thinking about how detailed you need the data to be for what you’re doing.<span id='Ef3w3-1LG'/>
- T- When you get a numerical answer, in your exams or otherwise, you should be thinking about whether or not it makes sense. In order to do this, it’s invaluable to remember a couple of numbers corresponding to things that you’re familiar with.<span id='uNVpJaSnG'/>
- H- Let’s say you were trying to figure out how fast a submarine was moving and you got an answer of 200 metres per second, does this make sense?<span id='kBZJGmSHX'/>
- T - Your best bet is to compare it to some data that you’ve already got locked into your head. I like to remember that a person jogging moves at about 3 m/s, a car moves at about 30, the speed of sound in air is a bit higher than 300, geostationary satellites orbit at 3000, the earth moves around the sun at around 30 000, the solar system orbits the centre of the galaxy around 300 000 and the speed of light is three hundred million or 3 times 10 to the 8  - all in metres per second. You should definitely remember these numbers, you’ll get a gut feeling for how fast things move and it’s super helpful when you’re trying to make sense of your answers.<span id='AvGKXAmzp'/>
- H- Looking back on the submarine we can now see that you must have made a mistake. The speed of sound in air is 300 m/s and the submarine is moving ⅔ of that. I personally wouldn’t expect the submarine to be moving as fast as the car so this calculation is way off. Again in your A levels, this thought process of ‘does my answer make sense’ is extremely useful.<span id='D6LPNXbFc'/>
- T - You should also be able to think about mass in the same way. Let’s consider orders of magnitude in kilograms:<span id='Bw5dqDNuD'/>
- An apple is around 0.1, a bag of sugar is around 1, a carry-on suitcase is about 10, people are around 100, cars are around 1000, a bus is about 10,000, a plane is around 100,000, a ship around 1,000,000 and the earth is 6 times 10 to the 24!!! Getting a feel for these numbers too is very useful.<span id='v_-c0fN3w'/>
- T- Okay, and that’s all we’ve got for this podcast, we’ll pick this up in part 3.<span id='rieEO4djw'/>
- H- Yep. See you in the next one.<span id='EiLi-1OcC'/>
- END.<span id='AH3NMZmET'/>
- **Unlinked References**<span id='Cbf4lC92O'/>
